Add blog post "A deep dive into faster semantic sparse retrieval in OpenSearch 2.12" (#2908)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2024-05-27-A-deep-dive-into-faster-semantic-sparse-retrieval-in-OS-2.12.md

### Query time

At query time, the search process consists of two parts: building the sparse vector and searching the inverted index. Neural sparse search has two modes: _doc-only_ and _bi-encoder_:

> - For the **doc-only** mode, we use a tokenizer and a predefined lookup table to build the sparse vector. The tokenization takes less than 1 millisecond. In this mode, the query tokens are not expanded with synonyms so all tokens must occur in the original query text. 

Reviewer: This "we" references OpenSearch

> - For the **doc-only** mode, we use a tokenizer and a predefined lookup table to build the sparse vector. The tokenization takes less than 1 millisecond. In this mode, the query tokens are not expanded with synonyms so all tokens must occur in the original query text. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For the **doc-only** mode, we use a tokenizer and a predefined lookup table to build the sparse vector. The tokenization takes less than 1 millisecond. In this mode, the query tokens are not expanded with synonyms, so all tokens must occur in the original query text. 
```

> - For the **bi-encoder** mode, we use a neural model to generate the sparse vector, just like we do during ingestion. Each query requires one model inference call. After we obtain the sparse vector, we transform it into Lucene disjunctive feature queries (`FeatureQuery(termA) OR FeatureQuery(termB) OR FeatureQuery(termC) ...`). Each `FeatureQuery` looks through the corresponding token's posting list. **Similarly to BM25, the search time complexity depends on the number of hit posting lists and the lists' lengths.** However, for neural sparse search, posting lists are longer (because of document expansion) and the bi-encoder needs to examine more posting lists (because of query expansion). Assuming all documents have a similar term frequency distribution, the length of posting lists grows proportionally to the number of documents. This means **the effort required to search the inverted index increases linearly with the number of documents in the dataset**.

Reviewer: Same as above, this "we" is "OpenSearch"

> - For the **bi-encoder** mode, we use a neural model to generate the sparse vector, just like we do during ingestion. Each query requires one model inference call. After we obtain the sparse vector, we transform it into Lucene disjunctive feature queries (`FeatureQuery(termA) OR FeatureQuery(termB) OR FeatureQuery(termC) ...`). Each `FeatureQuery` looks through the corresponding token's posting list. **Similarly to BM25, the search time complexity depends on the number of hit posting lists and the lists' lengths.** However, for neural sparse search, posting lists are longer (because of document expansion) and the bi-encoder needs to examine more posting lists (because of query expansion). Assuming all documents have a similar term frequency distribution, the length of posting lists grows proportionally to the number of documents. This means **the effort required to search the inverted index increases linearly with the number of documents in the dataset**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For the **bi-encoder** mode, we use a neural model to generate the sparse vector, just like we do during ingestion. Each query requires one model inference call. After we obtain the sparse vector, we transform it into Lucene disjunctive feature queries (`FeatureQuery(termA) OR FeatureQuery(termB) OR FeatureQuery(termC) ...`). Each `FeatureQuery` looks through the corresponding token's posting list. **Similarly to BM25, the search time complexity depends on the number of hit posting lists and the lists' lengths.** However, for neural sparse search, posting lists are longer (because of document expansion) and the bi-encoder needs to examine more posting lists (because of query expansion). Assuming all documents have a similar term frequency distribution, the length of posting lists grows proportionally to the number of documents. This means that **the effort required to search the inverted index increases linearly with the number of documents in the dataset**.
```

## Accelerating inverted index search

> To accelerate searching the inverted index, a common approach is _horizontal scaling_. OpenSearch distributes the documents in an index to multiple shards, each of which is a self-contained Lucene index. During the query phase, OpenSearch assigns a dedicated search thread to each shard. By adding more data nodes and distributing the shards evenly, we add more processing threads and distribute the search workload more efficiently. The workload for each thread decreases, leading to faster inverted index searches for both BM25 and neural sparse search.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To accelerate the inverted index search, a common approach is _horizontal scaling_. OpenSearch distributes the documents in an index to multiple shards, each of which is a self-contained Lucene index. During the query phase, OpenSearch assigns a dedicated search thread to each shard. By adding more data nodes and distributing the shards evenly, we add more processing threads and distribute the search workload more efficiently. The workload for each thread decreases, leading to faster inverted index searches for both BM25 and neural sparse search.
```

> To accelerate searching the inverted index, a common approach is _horizontal scaling_. OpenSearch distributes the documents in an index to multiple shards, each of which is a self-contained Lucene index. During the query phase, OpenSearch assigns a dedicated search thread to each shard. By adding more data nodes and distributing the shards evenly, we add more processing threads and distribute the search workload more efficiently. The workload for each thread decreases, leading to faster inverted index searches for both BM25 and neural sparse search.

Reviewer: Same as above "we=OpenSearch"

Note that the exact slope value depends on the distribution of the data. That means for different datasets, we may get different slopes. However, the relative difference between these slopes is likely to remain small. This is because the key factor influencing the slope is token expansion rate, which reflects the model's ability to identify semantically related terms. This ability, ideally, should be consistent across datasets. The experiment results on MS MARCO serve as a strong reference point and can be used to estimate the latency of neural sparse search for other datasets.

For medium to large datasets (millions to tens of millions of documents), neural sparse search is very efficient, with smaller client-side latency and significantly lower resource consumption compared to dense vector search (see [this blog](https://opensearch.org/blog/improving-document-retrieval-with-sparse-semantic-encoders/)). The doc-only mode delivers a better client-side search latency, faster than the time required for machine learning (ML) inference. Neural sparse search provides additional cost savings because you don't need to host a powerful ML service that supports a high throughput. 

> However, for extremely large datasets (billions of documents), the latency of neural sparse search also grows linearly with the number of documents. In this case, a dense vector search is a better choice for low latency, because the latency for the underlying Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) algorithm used in dense vector search grows logarithmically with the number of documents. We're actively working on improvements to neural sparse search to address its scalability limitations for extremely large datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, for extremely large datasets (billions of documents), the latency of neural sparse search also grows linearly with the number of documents. In this case, a dense vector search is a better choice for low latency because the latency of the underlying approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) algorithm used in dense vector search grows logarithmically with the number of documents. We're actively working on improvements to neural sparse search to address its scalability limitations with extremely large datasets.
```

## Accelerating sparse search with Lucene upgrades

> In the past 20 years, Lucene has continuously optimized its core performance, from streamlining index file I/O to improving posting list merging algorithms. Building neural sparse search on top of Lucene allowed us to take advantage of these optimizations. The optimizations are ongoing, and OpenSearch 2.12 uses the latest advancements in Lucene 9.9. Compared to Lucene 9.7 used in OpenSearch 2.11, Lucene 9.9 offers a significant performance boost, making it the fastest release yet (for more information, see the [Lucene release notes](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/LUCENE/Release+Notes)). This improved performance extends to neural sparse search.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the past 20 years, Lucene has continually optimized its core performance, from streamlining index file I/O to improving posting list merging algorithms. Building neural sparse search on top of Lucene allowed us to take advantage of these optimizations. The optimizations are ongoing, and OpenSearch 2.12 uses the latest advancements in Lucene 9.9. Compared to Lucene 9.7, used in OpenSearch 2.11, Lucene 9.9 offers a significant performance boost, making it the fastest version yet (for more information, see the [Lucene release notes](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/LUCENE/Release+Notes)). This improved performance extends to neural sparse search.
```

> Because of its use of the top-k hits disjunctive Boolean query, **neural sparse search performance improves with the new Lucene version**. To demonstrate this, we conducted a performance comparison between OpenSearch 2.11 and 2.12 on the MS MARCO dataset. We used OpenSearch [pretrained sparse encoding models](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/pretrained-models/#sparse-encoding-models) on the same cluster setup mentioned previously, with each index having 3 primary shards and 1 replica shard. All indexes were force-merged before the search for consistency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because of its use of the top-k hits disjunctive Boolean query, **neural sparse search performance improves with the new Lucene version**. To demonstrate this, we conducted a performance comparison between OpenSearch 2.11 and 2.12 on the MS MARCO dataset. We used OpenSearch [pretrained sparse encoding models](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/pretrained-models/#sparse-encoding-models) on the same cluster setup mentioned previously, with each index having 3 primary shards and 1 replica shard. All indexes were force merged before the search in order to ensure consistency.
```

> ### Benchmark results on 1M documents

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Benchmark results for 1M documents
```

> The following figure shows the experiment results for 1 million documents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following figure shows the experiment results for 1M documents.
```

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-27-A-deep-dive-into-faster-semantic-sparse-retrieval-in-OS-2.12/experiments-on-1m.png"/>

> ### Benchmark results on 8.8M documents

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Benchmark results for 8.8M documents
```

> The following figure shows the experiment results for 8.8 million documents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following figure shows the experiment results for 8.8M documents.
```

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-27-A-deep-dive-into-faster-semantic-sparse-retrieval-in-OS-2.12/experiments-on-1m.png"/>

### Results explained

The key takeaways from the experiment are:

1. **For 8.8M documents, search speeds improve significantly for all search methods.** The 8.8M dataset shows significant performance gains from Lucene optimizations. As mentioned previously, query latency includes the time needed for model inference and searching the inverted index. As the number of documents in an index increases, the time needed to search the inverted index grows linearly and becomes the dominant factor in the response time compared to model inference. For the bi-encoder mode, although the model inference time increases due to higher throughput, its overall latency still shows a significant reduction.

> 1. **For 8.8M documents, neural sparse search benefits from Lucene upgrades more than BM25.** This is because pruning algorithms like WAND and MAXScore in Lucene struggle to efficiently handle the learned sparse weights used by neural search, compared to the term frequencies that BM25 relies on. Additionally, neural sparse search needs to sort query clauses in order to calculate the minimum competitive score. For older Lucene versions, this step is associated with a greater overhead, hindering performance. Thankfully, [this issue has been addressed](https://github.com/apache/lucene/pull/12490) in newer Lucene versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **For 8.8M documents, neural sparse search benefits from Lucene optimizations more than BM25 does.** This is because Lucene pruning algorithms like WAND and MAXScore struggle to efficiently handle the learned sparse weights used by neural search, compared to the term frequencies that BM25 relies on. Additionally, neural sparse search needs to sort query clauses in order to calculate the minimum competitive score. For older Lucene versions, this step is associated with a greater overhead, hindering performance. Thankfully, [this issue has been addressed](https://github.com/apache/lucene/pull/12490) in newer Lucene versions.
```

> 1. **For 1M documents, we observed a noticeable performance improvement for both BM25 and the doc-only mode of neural sparse search.** However, the gains are less pronounced compared to the 8.8M document set. This is because the overall latency for 1M documents is already relatively low, and some fixed costs, like network I/O and tokenizer inference, take a larger proportion of the total processing time. **For the bi-encoder mode, the overall performance improvement is more limited. In this case, the model inference becomes the bottleneck for query throughput.** Because the model is at the limit of processing requests, some search requests are queued for inference.

Reviewer 2: Third sentence: "take a larger" => "consume a larger"? Last sentence: "limit of processing requests" => "request processing limit"?

> 1. **For 1M documents, we observed a noticeable performance improvement for both BM25 and the doc-only mode of neural sparse search.** However, the gains are less pronounced compared to the 8.8M document set. This is because the overall latency for 1M documents is already relatively low, and some fixed costs, like network I/O and tokenizer inference, take a larger proportion of the total processing time. **For the bi-encoder mode, the overall performance improvement is more limited. In this case, the model inference becomes the bottleneck for query throughput.** Because the model is at the limit of processing requests, some search requests are queued for inference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **For 1M documents, we observed a noticeable performance improvement for both BM25 and the doc-only mode of neural sparse search.** However, the gains are less pronounced compared to the 8.8M document set. This is because the overall latency for 1M documents is already relatively low, and some fixed costs, like network I/O and tokenizer inference, take a larger proportion of the total processing time. **For the bi-encoder mode, the overall performance improvement is more limited. In this case, the model inference becomes the bottleneck for query throughput.** Because the model is at its request processing limit, some search requests are queued for inference.
```

## Accelerating model inference using GPU

> In the previous section, we saw that model inference is the bottleneck for query throughput. Even with the inverted index performance improvements, we won't be able to handle more queries per second without addressing model inference limitations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the previous section, you saw that model inference is the bottleneck for query throughput. Even with the inverted index performance improvements, you won't be able to handle more queries per second without addressing model inference limitations.
```

> The model inference process involves numerous matrix operations, which rely heavily on CPU resources within the cluster nodes. Fortunately, GPUs are specifically designed for this type of workload. Their SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) architecture and optimizations for matrix operations make them much more efficient for handling pure model inference tasks. This translates to better performance at a lower cost, compared to CPUs. Additionally, techniques like mixed-precision computation and batch inference can further accelerate GPU-based model inference throughput.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The model inference process involves numerous matrix operations, which rely heavily on CPU resources within the cluster nodes. Fortunately, GPUs are specifically designed for this type of workload. Their single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) architecture and optimizations for matrix operations make them much more efficient for handling pure model inference tasks. This translates to better performance at a lower cost, compared to CPUs. Additionally, techniques like mixed-precision computation and batch inference can further accelerate GPU-based model inference throughput.
```

> We used a SageMaker GPU endpoint to host the neural sparse model. We connected to the model using a [SageMaker connector](https://github.com/zhichao-aws/neural-search/tree/neural_sparse_sagemaker/neural_sparse_sagemaker_example). We chose the **ml.g4dn.xlarge** instance because it is **much cheaper** than the ML node instance (r5.12xlarge) used in the last experiment. After evaluating several popular instances on Amazon SageMaker, we identified the ml.g4dn.xlarge instance as the most cost-effective option for our experiments based on its cost/performance ratio. Detailed results for processing 1 million documents are presented in the following sections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We used a SageMaker GPU endpoint to host the neural sparse model. We connected to the model using a [SageMaker connector](https://github.com/zhichao-aws/neural-search/tree/neural_sparse_sagemaker/neural_sparse_sagemaker_example). We chose the **ml.g4dn.xlarge** instance because it is **much cheaper** than the ML node instance (r5.12xlarge) used in the last experiment. After evaluating several popular instances on Amazon SageMaker, we identified the ml.g4dn.xlarge instance as the most cost-effective option for our experiments based on its cost/performance ratio. Detailed results for processing 1M documents are presented in the following sections.
```

> We used a SageMaker GPU endpoint to host the neural sparse model. We connected to the model using a [SageMaker connector](https://github.com/zhichao-aws/neural-search/tree/neural_sparse_sagemaker/neural_sparse_sagemaker_example). We chose the **ml.g4dn.xlarge** instance because it is **much cheaper** than the ML node instance (r5.12xlarge) used in the last experiment. After evaluating several popular instances on Amazon SageMaker, we identified the ml.g4dn.xlarge instance as the most cost-effective option for our experiments based on its cost/performance ratio. Detailed results for processing 1 million documents are presented in the following sections.

Reviewer 2: "instances on Amazon SageMaker" => "Amazon SageMaker instances"?

Reviewer: No because it's EC2 instances on Amazon SageMaker

> > **_NOTE:_**   In this blog, we are using [TorchServe](https://pytorch.org/serve/) auto batching for our GPU endpoint with a batch size of 16. TorchServe groups inference requests into batches and sends them to the model for batch inference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** For this blog post, we used [TorchServe](https://pytorch.org/serve/) auto batching for our GPU endpoint, with a batch size of 16. TorchServe groups inference requests into batches and sends them to the model for batch inference.
```

### Using a GPU at search time

> Our experiments show that using a GPU reduces the model inference latency by a large margin. This translates to a significant improvements in the client-side search latency and throughput, as shown in the following figure. This performance boost is crucial for running neural sparse search in a bi-encoder mode in production. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our experiments show that using a GPU reduces the model inference latency by a large margin. This translates to significant improvements in the client-side search latency and throughput, as shown in the following figure. This performance boost is crucial for running neural sparse search in bi-encoder mode in production. 
```

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-27-A-deep-dive-into-faster-semantic-sparse-retrieval-in-OS-2.12/gpu-search-performance.png"/>

### Using a GPU at ingestion time

> Ingestion relies heavily on model inference, so using a GPU at ingestion time leads to a higher ingestion throughput. In our experiment, we used the same GPU endpoint for ingestion. We performed ingestion using 6 clients, at a bulk size of 10. The following figure illustrates the experiment results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ingestion relies heavily on model inference, so using a GPU at ingestion time leads to a higher ingestion throughput. In our experiment, we used the same GPU endpoint for ingestion. We performed ingestion using 6 clients, with a bulk size of 10. The following figure illustrates the experiment results.
```

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2024-05-27-A-deep-dive-into-faster-semantic-sparse-retrieval-in-OS-2.12/gpu-ingestion-performance.png"/>

The GPU endpoint significantly accelerates the model ingestion process, achieving a 

> tripled throughput at a considerably lower cost. This is particularly valuable for scenarios with heavy ingestion workloads, regardless of whether you're using the bi-encoder mode or the doc-only mode for search.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tripled throughput at a considerably lower cost. This is particularly valuable in scenarios with heavy ingestion workloads, regardless of whether you're using the bi-encoder mode or the doc-only mode for search.
```

## Conclusions

> In this blog, we explored neural sparse search performance and showed our experimental data. Here are some key takeaways:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we explored the performance of neural sparse search and showed our experimental data. Here are some key takeaways:
```

> 1. Neural sparse search consists of tokenizer/model inference and searching the inverted index. The inverted index search latency grows linearly with the number of documents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Neural sparse search consists of tokenizer/model inference and inverted index search. The inverted index search latency grows linearly with the number of documents.
```

> 1. In our quantitative study on MS MARCO, the inverted index search workload in doc-only mode is about 1.8x that of BM25, and in bi-encoder mode is about 4x that of doc-only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In our quantitative study on the MS MARCO dataset, the inverted index search workload in the doc-only mode is about 1.8x that of BM25, and in the bi-encoder mode, it is about 4x that of the doc-only mode.
```

> 1. OpenSearch 2.12 and newer versions benefit from performance improvements of the new Lucene version. These improvements accelerate both BM25 and neural sparse search on inverted indexes. Neural sparse search benefits more from this upgrade compared to BM25.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. OpenSearch 2.12 and later versions benefit from the performance improvements of the new Lucene version. These improvements accelerate both BM25 and neural sparse search on inverted indexes. Neural sparse search benefits more from this upgrade compared to BM25.
```

> 1. Model inference is a throughput bottleneck for neural sparse ingestion and bi-encoder search. Using a GPU can significantly accelerate the model inference, leading to a higher throughput and better cost/performance ratio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Model inference is a throughput bottleneck for neural sparse ingestion and bi-encoder search. Using a GPU can significantly accelerate model inference, leading to a higher throughput and better cost/performance ratio.
```

> This study provides insights to help you scale your resources effectively when migrating from BM25 to neural sparse search in a new cluster. Refer to the quantitative data to estimate the workload requirements for your specific use case. If you require a high ingestion throughput or a high query throughput for searching in a bi-encoder mode, we recommend using a GPU. For more information on configuring neural sparse search, see [Neural sparse search documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/neural-sparse-search/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This study provides insights to help you scale your resources effectively when migrating from BM25 to neural sparse search in a new cluster. Refer to the quantitative data to estimate the workload requirements for your specific use case. If you require a high ingestion throughput or a high query throughput for searching in the bi-encoder mode, we recommend using a GPU. For more information about configuring neural sparse search, see the [Neural sparse search documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/neural-sparse-search/).
```

---
layout: post
title:  A deep dive into faster semantic sparse retrieval in OpenSearch 2.12
authors:
  - zhichaog
  - yych
  - dylantong
date: 2024-05-27 01:00:00 -0700
categories:
    - technical-posts
meta_keywords: search relevance, neural sparse search, semantic search, semantic search with sparse encoders
meta_description: We're going to first deep dive on the fundamental of Neural Sparse, while giving the quantitative study on the total workload amount. Then we will illustrate two benchmarks about accelerating Neural Sparse.
---

> In our last [blog](https://opensearch.org/blog/improving-document-retrieval-with-sparse-semantic-encoders/) we introduced Neural Sparse feature, a new efficient method of semantic retrieval GA in [2.11](https://opensearch.org/versions/opensearch-2-11-0.html) release. We released two sparse encoding models on OpenSearch [modelhub](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/pretrained-models/#sparse-encoding-models) and Hugging Face [modelhub](https://huggingface.co/opensearch-project). Both models have leading search relevance among sparse encoding models with same architecture. With Lucene inverted index, users can perform high-quality semantic search with low resource consumption.

Author: ack
